---
layout: default
title: Research
---

# Evolution of genetic systems

Sexual reproduction is a ubiquitous trait of eukaryotes. Yet, alternative reproductive systems, such as female clonality, male clonality, and hemi-clonal reproduction, have repeatedly evolved in diverse taxa. Our research aims to understand the proximate and ultimate mechanisms underlying transitions between genetic systems in the highly diverse and ecologically successful ant family. Ant societies are characterized by a reproductive division of labor between queen and worker females and a haplo-diploid sex-determination system. In most species, females are produced by sexual reproduction and develop into queens or workers depending on environmental factors, while males develop from unfertilized, haploid eggs. Deviations from this canonical reproduction schema have, however, been documented in several ant genera. In some taxa, the genetic makeup of an egg determines its developmental fate: workers arise from hybridization between divergent sympatric lineages, whereas queens are always purebred individuals (social hybridogenesis). In some of these species, queens are clones of their mother, while males are clones of their father (double-clonality). We also recently discovered an extraordinary reproductive system in the yellow crazy ant, resulting in males carrying maternal and paternal genomes in different cells of their body (chimerism). We employ population genetic, genomic, and cytological approaches to understand how division of labor and haplo-diploidy fostered the repeated evolution of such unusual genetic systems. Our group currently works on the longhorn crazy ant (*Paratrechina longicornis*), the little fire ant (*Wasmannia auropunctata*), the yellow crazy ant (*Anoplolepis gracilipes*), the argentine ant (*Linepithema humile*), and desert ants of the genus *Cataglyphis*.


# Genetic conflicts

Conflicts are important drivers of evolutionary changes and manifest at multiple biological levels, including genomes, cells, individuals, and animal societies, yet their long-term evolutionary effects remain poorly understood. These conflicts are often transient and, therefore, challenging to study. A long-standing challenge of evolutionary genomics and medicine is identifying genes underlying such conflicts. Despite a growing body of evidence outlining various types of conflicts, the genomic distributions of these and their impacts on genomic architectures are still largely uncharted territories. An overarching aim of our research is to investigate the diversity of genomic conflicts within ant societies, identify the molecular innovations associated with these conflicts, and assess their impact on genome evolution and phenotypic variation, including caste determination in ants. 
